# Setting Up a Modern C++ Development Environment on Windows

Windows is a popular platform for C++ development, with many tools and IDEs available. This guide will help you set up a modern C++ development environment on Windows using Visual Studio Code, CMake, Ninja, and vcpkg. We will install the Visual Studio IDE (different from Visual Studio Code) and integrate the compiler it provides with Visual Studio Code, CMake, and vcpkg. Let's get started!

## 1. Install Visual Studio (Required)

Visual Studio is the recommended IDE for C++ development on Windows. It includes the MSVC compiler, debugger, and build tools. We won't be using this IDE directly in the course, but will use the compiler and debugger that it provides. To install:

- Download and install [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/).
- Double click on the downloaded installer to start the installation process.
- Select the "**Desktop development with C++**" workload during installation.
  - This workload includes the necessary tools for C++ development.
- Once installed, open Visual Studio and see it opens correctly.
- You can now close Visual Studio as we will not be using it directly.
- Confirm that you have access to the cl.exe compiler: 
  - Go to the start menu
  - Search for "Developer Command Prompt for VS 2022" or "Developer PowerShell for VS 2022" or something similar
  - Open the command prompt or PowerShell
  - Type `cl.exe` and press Enter
  - You should see the compiler version information, something like below:
    ```
    PS C:\Users\UserName\source\repos> cl.exe
    Microsoft (R) C/C++ Optimizing Compiler Version 19.41.34123 for x86
    Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation.  All rights reserved.
    ```
  - If you see the compiler version information, you have successfully installed Visual Studio and the compiler. If you don't see this information, please check the installation steps again.

## 2. Install CMake (Latest Version)

CMake is essential for building C++ projects. Download and install the latest version from [CMake's official site](https://cmake.org/download/). After installation, do the following: 
- Add CMake to your system PATH during installation.
- Verify the installation by running `cmake --version` in a new terminal or powershell window. You should see the installed version of CMake like below: 
  ```
    PS C:\Users\UserName> cmake --version
    cmake version 3.30.2
    CMake suite maintained and supported by Kitware (kitware.com/cmake).
  ```
- If you see the installed version of CMake, you have successfully installed CMake. If you don't see this information, please check the installation steps again.

## 3. Install Ninja (Build System)

Ninja is a fast build system used with CMake. Download it as part of [WinLibs](https://winlibs.com/). Winlibs is a project that provides a set of C++ tools but we just need access to the Ninja tool that comes with it. It also gives us access to other compilers like GCC and Clang on Windows, but we'll just be happy to use the MSVC compiler that comes with the Visual Studio IDE. 
- Download the latest [WinLibs zip file](https://github.com/brechtsanders/winlibs_mingw/releases/download/14.2.0posix-12.0.0-ucrt-r3/winlibs-i686-posix-dwarf-gcc-14.2.0-llvm-19.1.7-mingw-w64ucrt-12.0.0-r3.zip) (latest at the time of writing).

- Extract the downloaded zip file to a folder (e.g., `C:\mingw64`).
- Add the `C:\mingw64\bin` folder to your system PATH.
- That path gives you access to the Ninja executable, together with other tools that come with WinLibs.
- Verify the installation by running `ninja --version` in a new terminal or powershell window. You should see the installed version of Ninja like below:
  ```
    PS C:\Users\UserName> ninja --version
    1.12.1
  ```

## 4. Install git (Version Control System)

Git is a popular version control system used by many developers. Download and install it from [Git's official site](https://git-scm.com/). After installation, do the following:

- Add Git to your system PATH during installation.
- Verify the installation by running `git --version` in a new terminal or powershell window. You should see the installed version of Git like below:
  ```
    PS C:\Users\UserName> git --version
    git version 2.34.1.windows.1
    ```
- If you see the installed version of Git, you have successfully installed Git. If you don't see this information, please check the installation steps again.
- Configure Git with your name and email address using the following commands:
  ```
  git config --global user.name "Your Name"
  git config --global user.email "
    ```
- Replace "Your Name" and "Your Email" with your actual name and email address.
- Verify the configuration by running the following commands:
  ```
  git config --global user.name
  git config --global user.email
  ```
- You should see your name and email address printed on the screen.
- If you see your name and email address, you have successfully configured Git. If you don't see this information, please check the configuration steps again.
- With git, now you can clone repositories, commit changes, and push code to remote repositories. Don't worry if you are not familiar with these terms; we will cover them in the course.
  

## 5. Install vcpkg (Package Manager)

vcpkg is a package manager for C++. It gives us the ability to download third-party packages and use them in our own projects. Very powerful stuff! We will install it through Git. To install it:

- Open a new terminal or PowerShell window.
- Change into the root directory (e.g., `C:\`). I would recommend you do to follow up well with the course.
- Download vcpkg through git with the following command: 
- Run the following command:
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg.git
    ```
- This will download and create a new folder named `vcpkg` in the root directory.
- Change into the `vcpkg` directory with the following command:
    ```bash
    cd vcpkg
    ```
- Run the following command to bootstrap vcpkg:
    ```bash
    bootstrap-vcpkg.bat
    ```
- This will build the vcpkg executable.
- Confirm that you have access to the vcpkg executable by running the following command inside the `vcpkg` directory:
    ```bash
    vcpkg --version
    ```
- You should see the installed version of vcpkg like below:
    ```
    PS C:\vcpkg> vcpkg --version
    2022.01.11-nohash
    ```
- If you see the installed version of vcpkg, you have successfully installed vcpkg. If you don't see this information, please check the installation steps again.
- Now, you can use vcpkg to install third-party libraries and use them in your projects. We will cover how this is done through CMake in the course.

## 6. Install Visual Studio Code (Required)

Visual Studio Code is a lightweight and powerful code editor that supports C++ development. We will use it to write and build our C++ projects in the course. To install:

- Download and install [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/).
- Open Visual Studio Code and install the following extensions:
  - C++ Environment Extensions (**Choose one of these**):
    - C++ Extension (from Microsoft)
    - Clang tools: 
      - Clangd (from LLVM)
      - CodeLLDB (from Vadim Chugunov)
  - CMake Tools (from Microsoft)
  - CMake (from Microsoft)
  - Other extesions I will be using in the course: 
    - Docker (Optional)
    - Dev Containers (Optional)
    - Vim (Optional)
  - You can install these extensions by clicking on the Extensions icon on the left sidebar and searching for them in the Extensions Marketplace.

## 7. Verify Your Installation

To check that everything is set up correctly, open a new Developer Command Prompt for VS 2022 or Developer PowerShell for VS 2022 window and run the following commands. We need to go through the developer prompt or PowerShell to ensure that the environment variables needed for the `cl` compiler are set correctly.:

```bash
cl.exe /?
cmake --version  # Check CMake
ninja --version  # Check Ninja
vcpkg --version  # Check vcpkg
```

If all commands return valid versions, your setup is complete!

## Conclusion

You have successfully set up a modern C++ development environment on Windows using Visual Studio Code, CMake, Ninja, and vcpkg. You are now ready to start building C++ projects on Windows. If you have any questions or run into issues, feel free to ask for help in the course community. Good luck with your C++ development journey!