# Setting Up a Modern C++ Development Environment on Linux (Ubuntu 24.04)

Linux is a popular platform for C++ development, with many tools and IDEs available. This guide will help you set up a modern C++ development environment on Ubuntu 24.04 using Visual Studio Code, CMake, Ninja, and vcpkg. We will install the necessary compilers and integrate them with Visual Studio Code, CMake, and vcpkg. The steps shown here are specific to Ubuntu 24.04 but they can easily be adapted to fit any distribution. Let's get started!

## 1. Download and Install Clang 19

Clang is a popular C++ compiler that is known for keeping up with the latest C++ standards and good error messages. We will prioritize it on Linux, because at the time of this writing, it is one of the best compilers that integrate CMake well to give us a good experience using C++20 Modules, one of the coolest features introduced in the C++20. The latest stable version at the time of this writing is 19. Clang 19 can be installed using the official LLVM script. This script automatically sets up the necessary APT repositories and installs the requested version. To install Clang 19:

- Open a terminal.
- Run the following commands:
```shell
    wget https://apt.llvm.org/llvm.sh
    chmod +x llvm.sh
    sudo ./llvm.sh 19 all
```

This script will:

- Add the official LLVM APT repository.
- Install Clang 19 and related tools.
- Update the package list and dependencies.

Once completed, verify the installation with:
```shell
    clang-19 --version
```

You should see output similar to:
```shell
    clang version 19.0.0
    Target: x86_64-pc-linux-gnu
    Thread model: posix
    InstalledDir: /usr/bin
```

Now clang-19 is installed on your system. But we need to make it so that we can call clang through the command `clang` instead of `clang-19`. There are many ways to do this, but will just use `update-alternatives`.  Run the following commands:
```shell
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/clang clang /usr/bin/clang-19 100
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/clang++ clang++ /usr/bin/clang++-19 100
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/clangd clangd /usr/bin/clangd-19 100
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/lldb lldb /usr/bin/lldb-19 100
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/lld lld /usr/bin/lld-19 100
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/clang-tidy clang-tidy /usr/bin/clang-tidy-19 100
```

These will make sure that `clang-19` is the default `clang` on your system. Additionaly many tools associated with clang will also be set up to use the clang-19 version.

You can now verify that your tools are accessible through the following commands: 
```shell
clang --version
clang++ --version
clangd --version
lldb --version
lld --version
clang-tidy --version
```

## 2. Install CMake (Latest Version)

CMake is a popular build system generator that is widely used in the C++ community. It is used to generate build files for various build systems, such as Ninja, Make, and Visual Studio. I know this may be music to your ears if this is your first exploration of the C++ world, but CMake is a tools that will make it very easy to stitch up several C++ files to make a modular and manageable project. To install the latest version of CMake for Linux, follow these steps:

- Go to the [CMake download page](https://cmake.org/download/).
- Download the latest install script for Linux. At the time of this writing, the latest script is [this one](https://github.com/Kitware/CMake/releases/download/v3.31.6/cmake-3.31.6-linux-x86_64.sh).
- You can download the script using the terminal with the following command:
```shell
wget https://github.com/Kitware/CMake/releases/download/v3.31.6/cmake-3.31.6-linux-x86_64.sh
```
- Make the script executable:
```shell
chmod +x cmake-3.31.6-linux-x86_64.sh
```
- Run the script to install CMake:
```shell
sudo ./cmake-3.31.6-linux-x86_64.sh --prefix=/opt/cmake-3.31.6 --skip-license
```
This will install CMake in the `/opt/cmake-3.31.6` directory. You can change the installation directory by modifying the `--prefix` option.

- Add CMake to your system PATH by running the following commands:
```shell
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/cmake cmake /opt/cmake-3.31.6/bin/cmake 100
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/ctest ctest /opt/cmake-3.31.6/bin/ctest 100
sudo update-alternatives --install /usr/bin/cpack cpack /opt/cmake-3.31.6/bin/cpack 100
```
This will make the CMake tools accessible through the `cmake`, `ctest`, and `cpack` commands, and will point to the latest version that we just installed. To be able to do what we'll do in the course, you need at least CMake 3.28.0, but it's always good to have the latest version.

- Now you should have CMake installed and you can verify it by running:
```shell    
cmake --version
```
This should output something like:
```shell    
cmake version 3.31.6
```


## 3. Install Ninja (Build System)

Ninja is a fast build system used with CMake. It was built by Google to be faster than Make, and it is widely used in the C++ community. To install Ninja on Ubuntu, follow these steps:

- Open a terminal.
- Run the commands below to install some pre-required tools like wget and unzip:
```shell
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install wget unzip
```
- Go to the Ninja Git Releases page and download the latest release. At the time of this writing, the latest release is [ninja-linux.zip](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/releases/download/v1.12.1/ninja-linux.zip)
- You can download it using the wget command:
```shell
wget https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/releases/download/v1.12.1/ninja-linux.zip   
```
- Unzip the downloaded file:
```shell
unzip ninja-linux.zip
```
- Move the ninja executable to the `/usr/bin` directory:
```shell
sudo mv ninja /usr/bin/ninja
```
- Make the ninja executable:
```shell
sudo chmod +x /usr/bin/ninja
```
- Verify the installation by running:
```shell
ninja --version
```
You should see output similar to:
```shell
1.12.1
```

## 4. Install git (Version Control System)

Git is a popular version control system used by many developers. It is used to track changes in source code and collaborate with other developers. We will first need it to download and install [vcpkg](https://vcpkg.io/en/index.html), our package manager, but we'll use it later on to manage changes across files in our projects. To install Git on Ubuntu, follow these steps:

- Open a terminal.
- Run the following command to install Git:
```shell
sudo apt-get install git
```
- Verify the installation by running:
```shell
git --version
```
You should see output similar to:
```shell
git version 2.25.1
```

## 5. Install vcpkg (Package Manager)

vcpkg is a C++ package manager that simplifies the process of installing and managing C++ libraries. It is widely used in the C++ community and integrates well with CMake. To install vcpkg on Ubuntu, follow these steps:

- Open a terminal.
- Change to the directory where you want to install vcpkg. For example, to install it in your home directory, as I like to do,  run:
```shell
cd ~
```
- Clone the vcpkg repository from GitHub:
```shell
git clone https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg.git
```
- Change to the vcpkg directory:
```shell
cd vcpkg
```
- Run the following command to bootstrap vcpkg:
    ```bash
    bootstrap-vcpkg.bat
    ```
- This will build the vcpkg executable.
- Confirm that you have access to the vcpkg executable by running the following command inside the `vcpkg` directory:
    ```bash
    vcpkg --version
    ```
- You should see the installed version of vcpkg like below:
    ```
    2022.01.11-nohash
    ```
- If you see the installed version of vcpkg, you have successfully installed vcpkg. If you don't see this information, please check the installation steps again.
- Now, you can use vcpkg to install third-party libraries and use them in your projects. We will cover how this is done through CMake in the course.
  
## 6. Install Visual Studio Code (Required)

Visual Studio Code is a lightweight and powerful code editor that supports C++ development. We will use it to write and build our C++ projects in the course. To install:

- Download and install [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/).
- Open Visual Studio Code and install the following extensions:
  - C++ Environment Extensions (**Choose one of these**):
    - C++ Extension (from Microsoft)
    - Clang tools (This is  what I will use in the course): 
      - Clangd (from LLVM)
      - CodeLLDB (from Vadim Chugunov)
  - CMake Tools (from Microsoft)
  - CMake (from Microsoft)
  - Other extesions I will be using in the course: 
    - Docker (Optional)
    - Dev Containers (Optional)
    - Vim (Optional)
  - You can install these extensions by clicking on the Extensions icon on the left sidebar and searching for them in the Extensions Marketplace.

## 7. Verify Your Installation

To check that everything is set up correctly, open a new Developer Command Prompt for VS 2022 or Developer PowerShell for VS 2022 window and run the following commands. We need to go through the developer prompt or PowerShell to ensure that the environment variables needed for the `cl` compiler are set correctly.:

```bash
clang --version  # Check Clang
cmake --version  # Check CMake
ninja --version  # Check Ninja
vcpkg --version  # Check vcpkg
```
If all commands return valid versions, your setup is complete!





